Apply editorial suggestions from Mattsson and others. (#29)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-aead-limits: draft-irtf-cfrg-aead-limits.md

attacker advantages in breaking these properties.  This document provides simple
guidance for users of common AEAD functions about how to limit the use of keys
in order to bound the advantage given to an attacker.  It considers limits in
both single- and multi-key settings.

--- middle

# Introduction

An Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) algorithm
provides confidentiality and integrity. {{!RFC5116}} specifies an AEAD

> as a function with four inputs -- secret key, nonce, optional plaintext,

Reviewer: Is it optional or just maybe zero-length?  I know that this distinction is sometimes important, but it is here?

> as a function with four inputs -- secret key, nonce, optional plaintext,
> and optional associated data -- that produces ciphertext output and an error code

Reviewer 2: I agree zero-length might be more precise here.
```suggestion
as a function with four inputs -- secret key, nonce, plaintext, associated data
(of which plaintext and associated data can optionally be zero-length) -- that
produces ciphertext output and an error code
```

Author: 👍

| t | Size of the authentication tag (in bits) |
| l | Maximum length of each message (in blocks) |
| s | Total plaintext length in all messages (in blocks) |
| q | Number of protected messages (AEAD encryption invocations) |
| v | Number of attacker forgery attempts (failed AEAD decryption invocations) |
| p | Upper bound on adversary attack probability |
| o | Offline adversary work (in number of encryption and decryption queries; multi-key setting only) |
| u | Number of keys (multi-key setting only) |
| B | Maximum number of blocks encrypted by any key (multi-key setting only) |

For each AEAD algorithm, we define the (passive) confidentiality and (active)
integrity advantage roughly as the advantage an attacker has in breaking the
corresponding classical security property for the algorithm. A passive attacker
can query ciphertexts for arbitrary plaintexts. An active attacker can additionally
query plaintexts for arbitrary ciphertexts. Moreover, we define the combined
authenticated encryption advantage guaranteeing both confidentiality and integrity
against an active attacker. Specifically:

- Confidentiality advantage (CA): The probability of a passive attacker capable of

> succeeding in breaking the confidentiality properties (IND-CPA) of the AEAD scheme.

Reviewer: "the probability of an attempted attack succeeding" might be better

Author: I kept this as-is to be consistent with the IA definition. (We can rework in a future issue/PR if needed.)

# Security Considerations {#sec-considerations}

> Many of the formulae in this document depend on simplifying assumptions,
> from differing models, that are not universally applicable. When using this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of the formulae in this document depend on simplifying assumptions,
from differing models, which means that results are not universally applicable. When using this
```

Just a grammar tic here.

document to set limits, it is necessary to validate all these assumptions
for the setting in which the limits might apply. In most cases, the goal is
to use assumptions that result in setting a more conservative limit, but this

> is not always the case. As an example of one such simplification, this document
> defines v as the total number of failed decryption queries, whereas in certain
> models, such as {{GCMProofs}}, it is defined as the total number of queries.

Reviewer 2: This is actually an interesting point: Yes, {{GCMProofs}} defines v as total number of decryption queries. However, forwarding encrypted ciphertexts to the decryption oracle or repeating queries to the decryption oracle is not allowed:

"Without loss of generality, we assume that A does not make trivial queries:
if the encryption oracle returns (C, T ) for a query (N, A, M ), then A does not make a query
(N, A, C, T ) to the decryption oracle, and A does not repeat a query to the decryption oracle." (p. 5)

That means that, in practice, any decryption query is a forgery _attempt_, so the difference actually is that we count _failed_ forgery attempts (which is the only thing you can do in practice) while they count _all_ forgery attempts (which you can only do in a model).  Of course, in practice, we care about bounding the any successful forgery.

Does the following capture this?

```suggestion
is not always the case. As an example of one such simplification, this document
defines v as the total number of failed decryption queries (that is, failed forgery
attempts), whereas models usually count in v all forgery attempts.
```

The CA and IL values defined in this document are upper bounds based on existing
cryptographic research. Future analysis may introduce tighter bounds. Applications

> SHOULD NOT assume these bounds are rigid, and SHOULD accommodate changes.

Reviewer: Good point.  Maybe clarify with something like: "In particular, in two-party communication, one participant cannot regard apparent overuse of a key by other participants as being in error, when it could be that the other participant has better information about bounds."

Reviewer 2: Agree that's an important point for (not) hard-coding limits. And I like the perspective that your communication partner might be cryptographically better informed ;-)

Author: Yeah, great suggestion!

Note that the limits in this document apply to the adversary's ability to
conduct a single successful forgery. For some algorithms and in some cases,
an adversary's success probability in repeating forgeries may be noticeably
larger than that of the first forgery. As an example, {{MF05}} describes

> such multiple forgery attacks in the context of AES-GCM in more detail.

Reviewer: Good stuff.
